Applications: New settings (#220)
ynput/ayon-documentation: website/docs/addon_applications_admin.md

![settings_applications](assets/applications/application_grorup.png)

Each Application is made of two levels.
1. **Application group:**
   1. **Host name:** Pipeline integration name supplied by an AYON addon.
   2. **Environment:** Define extra environments that are applicable to all versions of the given application version dependent.
2. **Application variant:** For each application variant we have
   1. **Name:** application variant name
   2. **Label:** application variant label
   3. **Executables:** Define executables (per platform).
   ![](assets/applications/mutliplatform_executables.png)
   4. **Arguments:** Define default arguments (`--nukex` for instance)
   ![](assets/applications/mutliplatform_args.png)
   5. **Environment:** Extend application's main environment.
   6. **+ button:** To add more variants.

:::info Allowed characters in names and labels
<!-- TODO: Note about allowed characters in host and variant names and label.
We may mention if these name are used in other places and mostly, they are hardcoded across the pipeline because it's not expected to change them. which may bring another question about why is it an editable field.

> Also, Mention if the allowed characters may/might change in the future or not. -->

Reviewer: Just commenting to state that we should implement this todo before merging.. ;) because this would otherwise look odd:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/43e449f1-0780-4176-b60c-7c5d6ce0cde0)

Reviewer 2: Hope this is better.
https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/pull/220/commits/98f421bde26a6d40fe845d1466e730a2557b8d9c

:::

#### Additional Applications

> It's possible to use applications addon to launch any applications that are not in built-in applications.
> However, they you won't find any AYON menus as that requires an AYON addon for that application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's possible to use applications addon to launch any applications that are not in built-in applications.
However, they have any AYON integration (e.g. menus, creators, etc.) as that requires an AYON addon for that application.
```

I wonder if it's worth it to put the "They won't have any active AYON integration after launch" message in a note?
```suggestion
It's possible to use applications addon to launch any applications that are not in built-in integrations that come with AYON.

:::note
Additional applications will only _launch_ but offer no further AYON integration (e.g. menus, creators, publishers) as that requires an AYON addon for that application, at which point it should not be under _additional applications_ anymore.
:::
```

![](assets/applications/applications_filters.png)

1. **Task Types:** Choose from a list of task types to determine which ones the filter profile will affect. If you want the profile to apply to all tasks, leave it blank.
2. **Allow:** Determines the mode of the filter, there are two options:
   1. **All applications**
   2. **Selected:** when chosen, the Applications list will show up.
3. **Applications:** List of applications available for profile filter.
4. **+ button:** Add new profile filter.

:::tip Default studio profile
![](assets/applications/default_application_filters.png)
Using default settings will show all applications for all task types.
It is recommended to have one default profile without task types filter, with standard set of applications used in the studio.
:::

### Tools Definitions

A tool in AYON is anything that needs to be selectively added to your DCC applications. Most often these are plugins, modules, extensions or similar depending on what your package happens to call it.

![](assets/applications/tools_defimitions.png)

> > Tools Definitions settings are much similar to Applications Definitions settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Tools Definitions settings are very similar to Applications Definitions settings.
```

1. **Tool Group:**
   1. **Name:** Tool name.
   2. **Label:** Tool label. Name is used if not filled.
   3. **Environments:** Environments variables that will be applied to all tool variants.
2. **Tool Variants:**
   1. **Name:** Tool variant name.
   2. **Label:** Tool variant label. Name is used if not filled.
   3. **Hosts:** List of host names you want the tool variant to work with.
   4. **Applications:** Filter applications for which is tool applicable.
   5. **Environments:** tool variant environments
   6. **+ button:** Add new tool variant.
3. **+ button:** Add new tool group.

:::tip Tool Examples

AYON comes with some major CG renderers pre-configured as an example, but these and any others will need to be changed to match your particular environment.

![](assets/applications/examples_tools.png)

<details><summary>Pre-configured Example - Autodesk Arnold</summary>

![tools](assets/applications/arnold_tool_example.png)

> In this example you can see that we set most of the environment variables in the general MTOA level, and only specify the version variable in the individual versions below. Because all environments within AYON setting will resolve any cross references, this is enough to get a fully dynamic plugin loading as far as your folder structure where you store the plugins is nicely organized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example you can see that we set most of the environment variables in the general MTOA level, and only specify the version variable in the individual versions below. Because all environments within AYON setting will resolve any cross references, this is enough to get fully dynamic plugin loading as far as your folder structure where you store the plugins is nicely organized.
```

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/pull/220/commits/6487b573c9ba30203ae4fbf2a4c6b517764b9e02

> MTOA will automatically set the `MAYA_VERSION`(which is set by Maya Application environment) and `MTOA_VERSION` into the `MTOA` variable. We then use the `MTOA` to set all the other variables needed for it to function within Maya.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MTOA will automatically set the `MAYA_VERSION` (which is set by Maya Application environment) and `MTOA_VERSION` into the `MTOA` variable. We then use the `MTOA` to set all the other variables needed for it to function within Maya.
```

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/pull/220/commits/6487b573c9ba30203ae4fbf2a4c6b517764b9e02

</details>
:::

### Tools filters
Tools that will be used on application launch. It is profile based filtering that allows to filter tools for a context. Tools can have more specific filtering than applications.

> All the tools defined in Tools Definitions can then be assigned to projects. You can also change the tools versions on any project level all the way down to individual asset or shot overrides. So it is possible to upgrade you render plugin for a single shot, while not risking the incompatibilities on the rest of the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All the tools defined in Tools Definitions can then be assigned to projects, certain task types or even selectively for only certain folders. You can also change the tools versions on any project level all the way down to individual asset or shot overrides. So it is possible to upgrade you render plugin for a single shot, while not risking the incompatibilities on the rest of the project.
```
Somehow the first sentence made it seem like you assign it per project - and then the second made it seem like you'd use the filtering per e.g. folder or task only for "version differences" but that's wrong, because you _may_ e.g. also enable a plug-in only for animation task type across the full project, of just one version.

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/pull/220/commits/6487b573c9ba30203ae4fbf2a4c6b517764b9e02

![](assets/applications/tools_filters_profiles.png)

1. **Folder Paths:** Folder paths to determine which ones the filter profile will affect. *It supports regex patterns.*
2. **Task Types:** Choose from a list of task types to determine which ones the filter profile will affect.
3. **Task Names:** List of task names to determine which ones the filter profile will affect.
4. **Tools:** Tools list to determine which ones the filter profile will affect.
5. **+ button:** Add application group filters profiles.

:::tip Example Filter profile

> Find example of Tool defintion and a profile Filter in the FAQ section below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Find example of Tool definition and a profile Filter in the FAQ section below:
```

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/pull/220/commits/6487b573c9ba30203ae4fbf2a4c6b517764b9e02

> [How to make a tool available for all folder paths in a project for a specific application variant ?](addon_applications_admin#how-to-make-a-tool-available-for-all-folder-paths-in-a-project-for-a-specific-application-variant-)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[How to make a tool available for all folder paths in a project for a specific application variant?](addon_applications_admin#how-to-make-a-tool-available-for-all-folder-paths-in-a-project-for-a-specific-application-variant-)
```

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/pull/220/commits/763c5f52655c3c6017806f934f9dd4419501fc35

So, you'd add gimp as additional app and AYON will be able to match it with your addon with gimp host name.
:::

Also note that, Host name is used in different places in AYON settings for profile filtering. 
e.g. `Hosts` list in [Tools Definitions](addon_applications_admin#tools-definitions) settings expects host names.

</details>

### What does AYON offer to customize the application environments ?

<details><summary>What does AYON offer to customize the application environments ?</summary>

> Originally answered by Roy Nieterau on ynput's forums [Maya - User prefs and studio prefs](https://community.ynput.io/t/maya-user-prefs-and-studio-prefs/1683/3)

1. Global Environment Variables: `ayon+settings://core/environments`
2. Per application group environment variables. e.g. maya: `ayon+settings://applications/applications/maya/environment`
3. Per application variant environment variables, e.g. maya 2025: `ayon+settings://applications/applications/maya/variants/0/environment`
4. Tools environment variables.

Tools are special in that you can set tools to apply to only to certain contexts, e.g. only certain assets or shots instead of project-wide.

</details>

> ### What is the syntax AYON uses for defining environments in settings ?

Reviewer: I wonder if it _may_ help linking that this uses [`acre` to construct the environment variables from the dicts](https://github.com/ynput/acre).

Because that package may then explain that we support [Platform specific assignments](https://github.com/ynput/acre?tab=readme-ov-file#platform-specific-paths-acreparse).

Also, it may be worth mentioning that we **recommend** the list assignment like you're doing in the TIP here because setting e.g. `"MY_VARIABLE": "A;B;C"` would work on Windows, but not on UNIX because there it the path separator is `:` instead of `;` so should be `A:B:C` on UNIX. Using the "MY_VARIABLE": ["A", "B", "C"]` automatically resolves it to the platform-specific separator.

<!-- :::info
The addon introduces a debug launcher action for users. For more details, please refer to [Application addon artist docs] (addon_applications_artist.md)
Also, The addon's client code features hook definitions that developers can leverage to implement launch hooks that tailor launch processes for other addons. For more details, please see [Application addon Dev docs] (addon_applications_dev.md).
::: -->

![settings_applications](assets/applications/admin_applications_layers.png)

The Addon features two primary settings categories: Definitions and Filters:

1. **Definitions:** available only in studio settings, allows to define all possible applications and tools that can be used across all projects.
2. **Filters:** defines when certain applications and tools are used on project level. This filters whether a certain application or tool should be enabled in a certain launch context, like a specific task type or project-wide.

## Applications Addon Settings
### Show only available applications
![](assets/applications/show_only_available_apps.png)

When enabled, AYON Launcher will display only those applications for which executable paths exist on the current machine.

> This acts as a extra filter to the Applications filters, ensuring that inaccessible applications are excluded from view.

Author: ```suggestion
This acts as an extra filter to the Applications filters, ensuring that inaccessible applications are excluded from view.
```

### Applications Definitions

In this section you can manage what Applications are available to your studio, locations of their executables, and their additional environments. 
In AYON context, each application that is integrated is also called a `Host` and these two terms will be used interchangeably in the documentation.

#### Built-in Applications

> Each integrated application (`Host`) has an application group e.g. Maya, Houdini, Nuke and etc.

Author: I would say that this explanation will create more confusion about app vs. host.

Author: ```suggestion
Each application definition has an application group e.g. Maya, Houdini, Nuke and etc.
```

![settings_applications](assets/applications/application_grorup.png)

Each Application is made of two levels.
1. **Application group:**

>    1. **Host name:** AYON uses this name to match applications and addons.

Author: ```suggestion
   1. **Host name:** Host name integration supplied by AYON addon.
```

   2. **Environment:** Define extra environments that are applicable to all versions of the given application version dependent.
2. **Application variant:** For each application variant we have
   1. **Name:** application variant name
   2. **Label:** application variant label
   3. **Executables:** Define executables (per platform).
   ![](assets/applications/mutliplatform_executables.png)
   4. **Arguments:** Define default arguments (`--nukex` for instance)
   ![](assets/applications/mutliplatform_args.png)
   5. **Environment:** Extend application's main environment.
   6. **+ button:** To add more variants.

:::info Allowed characters in names and labels
<!-- TODO: Note about allowed characters in host and variant names and label.
We may mention if these name are used in other places and mostly, they are hardcoded across the pipeline because it's not expected to change them. which may bring another question about why is it an editable field.
Also, Mention if the allowed characters may/might change in the future or not. -->
:::

#### Additional Applications

> It's possible to use AYON launcher to launch any applications that are not integrated into AYON. 

Author: ```suggestion
It's possible to use applications addon to launch any applications that are not integrated into AYON. 
```

However, they you won't find any AYON menus as that requires an AYON addon for that application.

![](assets/applications/additional_applications_1.png)

> - **+ button:** To add more applications.

Author: ```suggestion
- **+ button:** Add application group.
```

> Each added applications has the same application group explained earlier. 
> However it exposes few more attributes:

Author: ```suggestion
Application group in additional applications exposes few more attributes:
```

![](assets/applications/additional_applications_2.png)

- **Application Name:** The name of the application.
- **Application Label:** The label of the application and the application group (the name next to the toggle).
- **Application Icon:** The icon that would be displayed by the AYON launcher.

:::tip Example Additional Application
<details><summary>Example Additional Application</summary>

> ![](assets/applications/additional_applications_3.png)

Author: This is misleading screenshot, you can't use icon from disk.

</details>
:::

### Applications filters
These filters define the applications that will be shown in the launcher tool. It is profile based filtering that allows to filter applications for specific task types.

![](assets/applications/applications_filters.png)

1. **Task Types:** Choose from a list of task types to determine which ones the filter profile will affect. If you want the profile to apply to all tasks, leave it blank.
2. **Allow:** Determines the mode of the filter, there are two options:
   1. **All applications**
   2. **Selected:** when chosen, the Applications list will show up.

> 3. **Applications:** Applications list to determine which ones the filter profile will affect.

Author: ```suggestion
3. **Applications:** List of applications available for profile filter.
```

Author: NOTE: filter profile -> profile filter

> 4. **+ button:** To add more applications filters profiles.

Author: ```suggestion
4. **+ button:** Add new profile filter.
```

:::tip Default studio profile
![](assets/applications/default_application_filters.png)
Using default settings will show all applications for all task types.

> It is recommended to keep that one default profile without task types filter, which then acts as the standard set of applications used in the studio.

Author: ```suggestion
It is recommended to have one default profile without task types filter, with standard set of applications used in the studio.
```

:::

### Tools Definitions

A tool in AYON is anything that needs to be selectively added to your DCC applications. Most often these are plugins, modules, extensions or similar depending on what your package happens to call it.

![](assets/applications/tools_defimitions.png)
> Tools Definitions settings are much similar to Applications Definitions settings.

1. **Tool Group:**
   1. **Name:** Tool name.
   2. **Label:** Tool label. This name will also be used as the tool group setting name.

>    3. **Environments:** Define environments that are applicable to all tool variants.

Author: ```suggestion
   3. **Environments:** Environments variables that will be applied to all tool variants.
```

2. **Tool Variants:**

>    1. **Name:** Tool variant name.
>    2. **Label:** Tool variant label. This name will also be used as the tool variant setting name.

Author: ```suggestion
   1. **Name:** Tool variant name.
   2. **Label:** Tool variant label. Name is used if not filled.
```

>    2. **Label:** Tool variant label. This name will also be used as the tool variant setting name.

Author: It is not used for anything else probably?
```suggestion
2. **Label:** Tool variant label. Name is used if not filled.
```

>    3. **Hosts:** create a list of host names you want the tool variant to work with.

Author: ```suggestion
   3. **Hosts:** List of host names you want the tool variant to work with.
```

>    4. **Applications:** select which applications you want the tool variant to work with.

Author: ```suggestion
   4. **Applications:** Filter applications for which is tool applicable.
```

   5. **Environments:** tool variant environments

>    6. **+ button:** To add more tool variants.

Author: ```suggestion
   6. **+ button:** Add new tool variant.
```

> 3. **+ button:** To add more tool groups.

Author: ```suggestion
3. **+ button:** Add new tool group.
```

MTOA will automatically set the `MAYA_VERSION`(which is set by Maya Application environment) and `MTOA_VERSION` into the `MTOA` variable. We then use the `MTOA` to set all the other variables needed for it to function within Maya.
</details>
:::

### Tools filters
Tools that will be used on application launch. It is profile based filtering that allows to filter tools for a context. Tools can have more specific filtering than applications.

All the tools defined in Tools Definitions can then be assigned to projects. You can also change the tools versions on any project level all the way down to individual asset or shot overrides. So it is possible to upgrade you render plugin for a single shot, while not risking the incompatibilities on the rest of the project.

![](assets/applications/tools_filters_profiles.png)

> 1. **Folder Paths:** Create a list of folder paths to determine which ones the filter profile will affect. *It supports regex patterns.*

Author: ```suggestion
1. **Folder Paths:** Folder paths to determine which ones the filter profile will affect. *It supports regex patterns.*
```

2. **Task Types:** Choose from a list of task types to determine which ones the filter profile will affect.

> 3. **Task Names:** Create a list of task names to determine which ones the filter profile will affect.

Author: ```suggestion
3. **Task Names:** List of task names to determine which ones the filter profile will affect.
```

4. **Tools:** Tools list to determine which ones the filter profile will affect.
5. **+ button:** To add more applications filters profiles.

:::tip Example Filter profile

> Find example of Tool defintion and a Filter profile in the FAQ section below:

Author: ```suggestion
Find example of Tool defintion and a profile filter in the FAQ section below:
```

[How to make a tool available for all folder paths in a project for a specific application variant ?](addon_applications_admin#how-to-make-a-tool-available-for-all-folder-paths-in-a-project-for-a-specific-application-variant-)
:::

## FAQ

> ### How to use application variant group settings ?

Author: What is "variant group" for you? Group is "Maya", variant is "2024", "variant group" is not a thing.

Reviewer 2: just added by accident. it should be fixed now.

![settings_applications](assets/applications/settings_addapplication.gif)

2. **Add version** in case you want this version to be selectable individually. This is typically used for bigger releases that might not be fully compatible with previous versions. Keep in mind that if you add the latest version of an Application that is not yet part of the official AYON release, you might run into problems with integration. We test all the new software versions for compatibility and most often, smaller or bigger updates to AYON code are necessary to keep everything running.
![settings_applications](assets/applications/settings_addappversion.gif)

</details>

> ### What is host name used for ?

Author: I don't think applications documentation is correct place where to explain what is host name.

Reviewer 2: yeah, maybe we can just replace it by a tip mentioning this variable is used in pipeline and for more info go to some dev doc link ?

Reviewer 3: Yeah, explaining terms should happen elsewhere with just linking to those places.

Reviewer 2: ok, I've removed it 
https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/pull/220/commits/6bd703b62de767d53e9b4628cf92fa40e8be05e7

<details><summary>What is host name used for ?</summary>

> AYON uses host name to match applications to their host integration addons.

Author: If this would stay here I would relate it to applications addon, not to AYON.
```suggestion
Applications addon uses host name to match applications to their host integration addons.
```

Reviewer 2: then. I'll fix it and then we can figure out where to put it.

different applications can have the same host name as long as they are related to the same addon.
And, host name is defined in the addon's client code. e.g. [nuke's addon host name](https://github.com/ynput/ayon-nuke/blob/7a08f570512d5bd92caf014ba159889cfd912d38/client/ayon_nuke/addon.py#L13).

![](assets/applications/different_apps_same_host.png)

> :::tip

Author: This is admin documentation. The explanation is oversimplified (sounds almost magical), I would try to avoid "magical feel" to avoid disapointment.

Host name of the additional application can add application we don't have integrated yet (e.g. GIMP) and add gimp addon integration.
So, you'd add gimp as additional app and AYON will be able to match it with your addon with gimp host name.
:::

> Also note that, Host name is used in different places in AYON settings for profile filtering. 

Author: Is this note somehow important to applications documentation?

Reviewer 2: I was thinking about having addon application dev documentation. 
as there are some interesting info that worth mentioning. 
e.g.  
https://github.com/ynput/ayon-applications/pull/12 
also, the fact that hooks are implemented in applications addon 
and this interesting method `add_implementation_envs`
maybe cli actions and https://github.com/ynput/ayon-applications/pull/1

e.g. `Hosts` list in [Tools Definitions](addon_applications_admin#tools-definitions) settings expects host names.

</details>

### What does AYON offer to customize the application environments ?

<details><summary>What does AYON offer to customize the application environments ?</summary>

> Originally answered by Roy Nieterau on ynput's forums [Maya - User prefs and studio prefs](https://community.ynput.io/t/maya-user-prefs-and-studio-prefs/1683/3)

1. Global Environment Variables: `ayon+settings://core/environments`
2. Per application group environment variables. e.g. maya: `ayon+settings://applications/applications/maya/environment`

> 3. Per application version environment variables, e.g. maya 2025: `ayon+settings://applications/applications/maya/variants/0/environment`

Author: ```suggestion
3. Per application variant environment variables, e.g. maya 2025: `ayon+settings://applications/applications/maya/variants/0/environment`
```

---
id: addon_applications_admin
title: Applications and Tools
sidebar_label: Applications and Tools
description: Applications Addon Admin Documentation
toc_max_heading_level: 5
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';
import ReactMarkdown from "react-markdown";
import versions from '@site/docs/assets/json/Ayon_addons_version.json'

<ReactMarkdown>
{versions.Applications_Badge}
</ReactMarkdown>

## Introduction

The Applications addon is designed to configure applications, set their executable paths, and set up their startup environments.

> <!-- :::info
> The addon introduces a debug launcher action for users. For more details, please refer to [Application addon artist docs] (addon_applications_artist.md)
> Also, The addon's client code features hook definitions that developers can leverage to implement launch hooks that tailor launch processes for other addons. For more details, please see [Application addon Dev docs] (addon_applications_dev.md).
> ::: -->

Reviewer 2: since, https://github.com/ynput/ayon-applications/pull/12 is merged. 
shall we uncomment this section ? 

```suggestion
:::info
The addon introduces a debug launcher action for users. For more details, please refer to [Application addon artist docs] (addon_applications_artist.md)
:::
```

also, should we have a page for applications addon artist ?

Reviewer 2: I removed it.
https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/pull/220/commits/d7205537ed64af341d102c0e94c5e5c5e394b32b

2. **Filters:** defines when certain applications and tools are used on project level. This filters whether a certain application or tool should be enabled in a certain launch context, like a specific task type or project-wide.

## Applications Addon Settings
### Show only available applications
![](assets/applications/show_only_available_apps.png)

When enabled, AYON Launcher will display only those applications for which executable paths exist on the current machine.
This acts as an extra filter to the Applications filters, ensuring that inaccessible applications are excluded from view.

### Applications Definitions

In this section you can manage what Applications are available to your studio, locations of their executables, and their additional environments. 
In AYON context, each application that is integrated is also called a `Host` and these two terms will be used interchangeably in the documentation.

#### Built-in Applications
Each application definition has an application group e.g. Maya, Houdini, Nuke and etc.

![settings_applications](assets/applications/application_grorup.png)

Each Application is made of two levels.
1. **Application group:**

>    1. **Host name:** Pipeline integration name supplied by an AYON addon.

Reviewer 2: Since, I've removed `What is host name used for?` section. https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/pull/220/commits/6bd703b62de767d53e9b4628cf92fa40e8be05e7

should we rephrase this line ? 
Because, it bothers me reading through the documentation without a clue what should this variable used for and what value should I use for it.

Reviewer: I suppose just:
```suggestion
   1. **Host name:** Pipeline integration name supplied by an AYON addon, these are usually constants related to a host integration like "maya", "houdini", "nuke" and so forth. For now they are best left at the default values.
```

For names, we typically use lowercase letters, numbers, and hyphens (`-`).
For labels, both uppercase and lowercase letters, as well as periods (`.`), are used.

:::

#### Additional Applications

It's possible to use applications addon to launch any applications that are not in built-in integrations that come with AYON.

:::note
Additional applications will only _launch_ but offer no further AYON integration (e.g. menus, creators, publishers) as that requires an AYON addon for that application, at which point it should not be under _additional applications_ anymore.
:::

![](assets/applications/additional_applications_1.png)
- **+ button:** Add application group.

Application group in additional applications exposes few more attributes:

![](assets/applications/additional_applications_2.png)

- **Application Name:** The name of the application.
- **Application Label:** The label of the application and the application group (the name next to the toggle).
- **Application Icon:** The icon that would be displayed by the AYON launcher.

:::tip Application Icon
<!-- TODO: Add more info about what ayon expects regards the application icon. -->

> :::

Reviewer 2: what should we write in this section ? 

--- 

Kuba mentioned on discord: 

I think that right now the icon must be in `client/ayon_applications/icons/{filename}`.
And in future also in `public/icons/{filename}` 

which means that admins must adjust the codebase then create and upload a package  in order to just add an icon.. 
This sounds too much for just adding an icon 😅.

Although, discussing this matter is irrelevant to the doc PR, I think it can help us come up with ideas for writing the doc.

Reviewer: Either we write:

> The Application icon must currently live within the codebase and get packaged along with the addon and looks in the addon's client icons folder and the public icons on the server. Note that a different workflow where we can reliably manage these icons and serve them across different sites is still on the backlog.

Or we discard that section for now.

Author: `Icon filename. At this moment the icon must live in applications addon codebase. More options will come in future releases.`

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/pull/220/commits/29fc2ae5149c3d4f6cf2aa005f30d453da9593c0

In this example MTOA will automatically set the `MAYA_VERSION`(which is set by Maya Application environment) and `MTOA_VERSION` into the `MTOA` variable. We then use the `MTOA` to set all the other variables needed for it to function within Maya.
![tools](assets/settings/tools_01.png)

All the tools defined in here can then be assigned to projects. You can also change the tools versions on any project level all the way down to individual asset or shot overrides. So it is possible to upgrade you render plugin for a single shot, while not risking the incompatibilities on the rest of the project.

## Applications filters

> Applications that will be shown in launcher tool based on values in this setting. It is profile based filtering that allows to filter applications for specific task types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These filters define the applications that will be shown in the launcher tool. It is profile based filtering that allows to filter applications for specific task types.
```

Using default settings will show all applications for all tasks. That can be easily changed.

Simple example:
![settings_applications](assets/applications/admin_applications_profiles.png)

In this case all tasks with `Modeling` type will show only `Maya 2025`. Any other task type will show `After Effects 2024`, `Maya 2025`, `Nuke 15.0` and `Photoshop 2024`.

Note: It is recommended to have one profile without task types filter with standard set of applications used in studio.

## Tools filters
Tools that will be used on application launch. It is profile based filtering that allows to filter tools for a context. Tools can have more specific filtering than applications.

> ## Applications and Tools attributes
> Settings based filtering was introduced in applications addon release 1.0.0 . Before that applications were set with `applications` attribute on project (located under project anatomy) and tools were set using `tools` attribute on Project, Folder and Task entities.
> 
> We still keep this the attributes in the system. Newly introduced settings do allow to switch between new settings and attributes, so we don't break existing productions without option to change it back.
> 
> By default, are used settings based filters, but that is automatically changed to use attributes when settings from older version of applications addon are converted, so it is not needed to change it manually.
> 
> Please keep in mind that `applications` and `tools` attributes are deprecated, and they will be removed in future versions of applications addon.

Reviewer: I think we should be much clearer about this being legacy and that there is OLD versus NEW behavior where the old behavior is deprecated.
```suggestion
## Legacy: Applications and Tools attributes

Settings based filtering was introduced in applications addon release 1.0.0 . Before that applications were set with `applications` attribute on project (located under project anatomy) and tools were set using `tools` attribute on Project, Folder and Task entities.

For backwards compatibility the settings do allow to switch between new settings and attributes and the legacy behavior, so we don't break existing productions without option to change it back.

:::note Legacy behavior
The legacy behavior is enabled by **disabling** the filters in settings:
```
ayon+settings://applications/project_applications/enabled
ayon+settings://applications/project_tools/enabled
```
:::

By default, the settings based filters are used, but that is automatically changed to use attributes when settings from older version of applications addon are converted, so it is not needed to change it manually for backwards compatibility from older addons.

:::warning Deprecated
Please keep in mind that `applications` and `tools` attributes are deprecated, and they will be removed in future versions of applications addon. It is recommended to use the 1.0.0+ application and tool filtering instead.
:::
```

Simple example:
![settings_applications](assets/applications/admin_applications_profiles.png)

In this case all tasks with `Modeling` type will show only `Maya 2025`. Any other task type will show `After Effects 2024`, `Maya 2025`, `Nuke 15.0` and `Photoshop 2024`.

:::note Default studio profile
It is recommended to have one profile without task types filter, which then acts as the standard set of applications used in the studio.
:::

## Tools filters
Tools that will be used on application launch. It is profile based filtering that allows to filter tools for a context. Tools can have more specific filtering than applications.

## Legacy: Applications and Tools attributes

Settings based filtering was introduced in applications addon release 1.0.0 . Before that applications were set with `applications` attribute on project (located under project anatomy) and tools were set using `tools` attribute on Project, Folder and Task entities.

For backwards compatibility the settings do allow to switch between new settings and attributes and the legacy behavior, so we don't break existing productions without option to change it back.

:::note Legacy behavior

> The legacy behavior is enabled by **disabling** the filters in settings:

Reviewer: Page ends abruptly?

In this example MTOA will automatically set the `MAYA_VERSION`(which is set by Maya Application environment) and `MTOA_VERSION` into the `MTOA` variable. We then use the `MTOA` to set all the other variables needed for it to function within Maya.

> ![tools](assets/settings/tools_01.png)

Reviewer: Unfortunately I can't comment on the exact line - but can we use this PR to also refactor `pype` on [Line 67](https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/blob/2f272ba7d4ff8d73262a7e7d095c2b962a98e3b8/website/docs/addon_applications_admin.md?plain=1#L67) to `AYON`?

All the tools defined in here can then be assigned to projects. You can also change the tools versions on any project level all the way down to individual asset or shot overrides. So it is possible to upgrade you render plugin for a single shot, while not risking the incompatibilities on the rest of the project.

## Applications filters
These filters define the applications that will be shown in the launcher tool. It is profile based filtering that allows to filter applications for specific task types.

Using default settings will show all applications for all tasks. That can be easily changed.

Simple example:
![settings_applications](assets/applications/admin_applications_profiles.png)

In this case all tasks with `Modeling` type will show only `Maya 2025`. Any other task type will show `After Effects 2024`, `Maya 2025`, `Nuke 15.0` and `Photoshop 2024`.

:::note Default studio profile
It is recommended to have one profile without task types filter, which then acts as the standard set of applications used in the studio.
:::

## Tools filters

> Tools that will be used on application launch. It is profile based filtering that allows to filter tools for a context. Tools can have more specific filtering than applications.

Reviewer: It's not a must have - however it **would be nice** if there's also an example of Tool Filters similar to Applications example, including a screenshot.

Anything @MustafaJafar or @LiborBatek could maybe assemble?

Reviewer 2: yeah, I agree. 
We should also mention how the filtering works. 
As far as I know, it uses regex patterns for folder paths. 
anyways, I'll mention it in my review.

    ]
}
```
:::

</details>

### How to update the task types list in the filter settings ?

<details><summary>How to update the task types list in the filter settings ?</summary>

Task types list in Studio settings is generated from the default anatomy preset. 

Task types list in Project settings is generated from the project's anatomy. 

> To navigate quickly, click `a+a`.

Reviewer: Somehow this provided me with less info than I expected:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/27956156-be57-4839-9926-580d3ff541ae)

For whatever reason it made it 'hard to read'.
Should it be bullet points maybe? Or **Studio Settings** and **Project Settings** worded in bold to differentiate the two lines?

Reviewer 2: Hope this is better https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/pull/220/commits/ab452014f98efa0970a03f6a27deed767835e5aa
